38 ΙΙ 408—452

which are unpleasant to the feeling are niutually repugnant,
formed as they are out of an unlike first shape 3 lest haply you
suppose that the harsh grating of the creaking saw consists of
elements as smooth as those of tuneful melodies which musicians
wake into life with nimble fingers and give shape to on strings3
or suppose that the first-beginnings are of like shape which pass
into the nostrils of nien, when noisome cai-cases are burning,
and when the stage is fresh sprinkled with Cilician saffron, while
the altar close- by exhales Panchaean odours; or decide that the
pleasant colours of things which are able to feast the eyes are
formed of a seed like to the seed of those which make the pupil
smart and force it to shed tears or from their disgusting aspect
look hideous and foul. For every shape which gratifies the senses
has been formed not without a smoothness in its elements3 but on
the other hand whatever is painful and harsh, has been produced
not without some roughness of matter. There are too some
elements which are with justice thought to be neither smooth nor
altogether hooked with barbed points, but rather to have minute
angles slightly projecting, so that they can tickle rather than
hurt the senses3 of which class tartar of wine is formed and the
flavours of elecampane. Again that hot fires and cold frost have
sange of a dissimilar kind wherewith to pierce the senses, is
proved to us by the touch of each. For touch, touch, ye holy
divinities of the gods, the body’s feeling is, either when an
extraneous thing makes its way in, or when a thing which is born
in the body hurts it, or gives pleasure as it issues forth by the
birth-bestowing ways of Venus, or when from some eollision the
seeds are disordered within the body and distract the feeling by
their mutual disturbance ς as if haply you were yourself to strike
with the hand any part of the body you please and so make trial.
VVherefore the shapes of the first-beginnings must differ widely,
Since they are able 10 give birth to different feelings.

Again things which look to us hard and dense must consist of
particles more hooked together, and be held in union because
welded all through with branch-like elements. In this class first
of all diamond stones stand in foremost line inured to despise
blows, and‘stout blocks of basalt and the strength of hard iron
and brass bolts which scream out as they hold fast to their
staples. Those things which are liquid and of fluid body ought

